Does it have any impact upon you that
these reasonably intelligent group of
people actually think that what you
inflicted upon the country has damaged
the country?
>> that the British people voted for. Yes,
they voted for it. And we should respect
the democratic result which you have
never wanted to do.
>> It was a day that changed Britain and
Europe. And 10 years on, Alister
Campbell and Jacob Rees-Mogg go
head-to-head on Brexit. Do you think
that Brexit has led us to the much more
multi-party politics that we are in now?
>> One of the reasons for Brexit [music]
is that people felt whoever they voted
for, nothing changed. Very little has
changed in the 10 years since. And now
they're looking at other parties. A lot
of people who voted for Brexit are
disappointed that that hasn't delivered
a better life for them.
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, [music] this is
the Michelle Hussein Show.
Now, hopefully you all know by now that
this show is a place where we try to
make sense of the world with one
essential conversation every week. That
is the case with episodes every Friday,
except when there's more to say. That's
how it is this week because it is
exactly 10 years since voters in the UK
faced a big choice, having their say on
membership of the European Union. 2016.
48% of people voted to remain in the EU,
52%
voted to leave. The moment when the
Brexit process began.
Even though episodes here are usually
one-to-one, this one is a debate because
we wanted to bring together two of the
most high-profile campaigners for and
against Brexit. Two people who still
feel strongly about it 10 years on. It's
Jacob Rees-Mogg and Alister Campbell.
And we brought them together on a stage
in London in front of an audience of
Bloomberg subscribers. So, let's get to
it. Here's what happened when they both
joined me on stage.
I think I can definitely say that these
two do not love each other. Um they do
love politics and debate, and they are
with us to mark 10 years since the vote
to leave the EU. So, please welcome
Alistair Campbell and Jacob Rees-Mogg.
>> [applause]
>> Welcome. Now, some of you will remember
that it was at Bloomberg, not in this
building, in our old headquarters, where
David Cameron made the fateful pledge
that he was in favor of uh having an
in-out referendum um on on the EU. 10
years ago, Jacob Rees-Mogg, you were a
Conservative MP, you campaigned to leave
the EU. Alistair Campbell, you were very
much on the other side in 2016, but
people knew you already from your work
with Tony Blair in Downing Street. In
the time we have, I want to look back at
the economic impact and the political
impact of Brexit in the last 10 years,
and also your views on the future and
what could or should be the future of
the UK's relationship with the EU. So,
first of all, as the results came in in
June 2016,
what did you not appreciate that we now
know?
Jacob?
>> Well, the one thing I didn't appreciate
was that the remain side, who'd been
quite passive in the referendum
campaign, would start campaigning much
harder after the result than they had
done before.
>> Very fair point.
>> Whereas my side thought we'd won and
stopped, and that was a mistake by our
side, and fascinating by the other side.
And that's had very important
consequences because since then you've
had much more from people who think it
was a mistake. I think the reason they
started campaigning after the result was
they never thought they would lose, and
they thought it was just a few
eccentrics like me who were in favor of
it and that nobody would in fact vote
for it. I thought at the time we would
win because the more I got away from
central London, the clearer it became
that there was a very large base of
support for Brexit. So, that was the one
big thing that I have noticed is the is
the difference in campaigning since the
result.
>> Alister?
>> Well,
when you were asking the question, the
thing that popped into my head
was I was in ITV studio.
Um
Tom Bradby was sitting there sort of
talking about this that and the other.
And the very moment when
it came up that it is now impossible for
Remain to win,
I saw David Davis and Liam Fox look at
each other with absolute panic in their
eyes.
Uh the thing that really surprised me
was that And Jacob is right, by the way,
the the Remain campaign was terrible.
I actually
I regret now I didn't get that involved
in the Remain campaign because Cameron
and Osborne kept telling us, "It's all
fine. We're all going to It's all fine.
Don't worry about it."
I got involved subsequently and I was
one of the few who admitted that the
People's Vote campaign, to my mind, was
probably the only vehicle we had left
possibly to stop what I thought was a
terrible act of self-harm.
So, I was open about that. But I think
it what genuinely surprised me was there
was just no plan. There was no plan at
all. Um the lies had been told, the
myths had been sold, and
and we had to pick up the pieces.
>> I I do think Alister Campbell, of all
people, has to be careful about talking
about lies considering his reputation.
>> Well, what's the reputation?
>> What's your reputation? Oh, a High Court
judge in 1996 saying you were an
unreliable witness. That's quite a good
part of your reputation, isn't it?
>> I don't Well,
>> Do you mind? Do you mind if we stick to
Brexit? I I think there's quite There's
quite enough to get into on the
>> But Alister brought up this question of
lies.
>> did lie.
>> No, we didn't.
>> You did. You lied. You drove a red bus.
>> But I think if we're talking about lies,
Alister needs to look at his own record
because he has done more to damage trust
in British politics than anybody else.
>> the guy. This is the
>> Oborne has written a book about this.
So, if we wanted to, we could get into
all of that.
>> We getting all the old stuff out.
>> This is really important because I think
that
>> I would I would rather that both that
given that I've set the parameters on
that we're going to talk about economic
impact, political and do you mind if we
turn to economic impact?
>> Alister keeps saying we lied and then I
won't talk about his lies.
>> Well, I can't
Could we rest that point, Alister? I
think it would be good to talk about the
economic impact.
>> We could spend the [snorts] whole debate
on Alister's lies when he was in
government.
>> Can I Can I tell you what Bloomberg
Economics analysis just released has
been about the economic impact of the
last 10 years because this is just, you
know, they've they've crunched the
numbers as you'd as you'd expect. And in
terms of the economic impact, this has
been their finding that Brexit may have
already cost the UK economy between two
and four percent of GDP that the central
estimate is two
two and a half percent of GDP lost over
the long run, which is equivalent to
about 30 billion pounds a year in
foregone annual tax revenue. How do you
feel about that, Jacob?
>> the figures don't actually stack up. So,
if we look at the Bloomberg figures,
which
>> which is No, they're different ways of
interpreting figures. So, when you look
at how the UK economy has done, actually
we've outperformed Germany, we performed
broadly in line with France. Why, if
we'd remained in the EU, would we have
performed as the outlier?
>> Let me put it in broader terms. Do you
accept that there has been any economic
hit at all in the last 10 years compared
to where the UK would have been had it
remained in the EU?
>> I think using our economic freedoms has
actually helped us. And if you look at
our trade, particularly well, it's a
complete answer if you give me a minute.
If you look at our trade, our invisible
trade, our services trade has been
roaring ahead. And I I that's been
partly possible. And you've seen our
trade with India increase very rapidly
in invisibles because we're outside the
European Union. We're no longer confined
by its rules.
>> So has has there been an overall
>> You think there's been Okay, that's a
very rare view that you think overall
there's been a net economic positive.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. Um
>> I don't know Let me because we got the
vaccine early.
>> No, that's a different That's a
different point.
>> But the early vaccine meant our economy
opened up early.
>> Jacob says he doesn't want to leave. I'm
not going to leave this lying thing
because it is part of
>> Well, let's go back to the lying thing.
I've got a list of things here.
>> I'm sure you have.
>> I've got a nice record of lying to
select committees of the house. I've
heard them all.
>> Uh of sexing up a document, you may
remember.
>> Can I just finish the point?
>> Well, you want to talk about lying?
>> No, I want you I want you to explain to
this public you have got
>> You can't point out a single lie to me.
>> You have got a list there.
>> I can point out a whole history of lying
to you.
>> do. They do not want to talk about the
substance because they are so deluded
and still thinking Brexit has been
anything other than
>> I'm happy to talk about the substance.
>> single person in this room poorer.
>> Well, that's just your view.
>> It is true. You've made every single
person in this country poorer.
>> We opened the economy earlier because we
had the vaccine
>> by the lies that you told
>> That's just your view.
>> and you will never accept that.
>> You're the one who destroyed trust in
the British government by the lies that
you told over Iraq.
>> Let me ask Alistair Campbell the same
question that I put to you about the
economic impact of the last 10 years.
>> few more facts than he gave you.
>> Well, would you accept that the economic
impact has not been as bad as you
thought given that today the UK is still
under OECD projections projected to be
the third large third fastest growing
economy in the G7.
>> I think that the the economic
consequences of Brexit have been
catastrophic.
I think that you could if you take
you've given the a conservative and if
you take some of the other assessments
that we're up to 8% between 6 and 8% is
on the economy.
We now have small firms that write to me
all the time who have literally given up
trying to trade with the European Union
because of the red tape that these liars
said they would cut by leaving Brussels,
that they've now given up trading with
business. Productivity is lower than it
would be. Uh our our our GDP is lower
than it than it would be. And what's
more, we could double we've got a
security crisis at the moment. If we, to
my argument, had not left the European
Union, we could currently double defense
spending and increase the National
Health Service by 50% without touching
any tax.
>> if everything that you're saying is
true, then why are we projected to be
the third fastest-growing economy in the
G7 this year?
>> I've never been one of those anti-Brexit
people who thinks that the European
Union is some kind of panacea or some
sort of Europe is not in a good place.
Europe's competitiveness is too low. But
we, in to wrenching ourselves out of the
biggest market in the world, we have
done fundamental damage to every single
person and business in this country.
>> Okay, first of all, these figures are
just wrong. The 8% is a joke figure and
assumes that we would have grown as the
United States has grown. The United
States has grown faster because it's got
cheap energy. We have grown faster than
Germany. What part of being in the EU
would have allowed us to grow even
faster than we have when its anchor
economy has been failing. I'm relying
I'm relying I'm relying I'm relying
question is mainly a question of public
sector, whereas the private sector
productivity has been marginally
increasing. And the public sector
doesn't export to the European Union.
>> I'm relying on the analysis done by the
government, by this government and the
last government, that it's been tracked
that we have taken a substantial
>> Okay, and I'm going to refer everyone
here to
to the Bloomberg Economics analysis
which has a wide range and where
everyone can see the basis of the
figures that I'm using.
>> you just
>> how OBR came to its 4% figure?
>> What do you want me to say about the
OBR?
>> Well, that's the key figure. The OBR's
4% figure. The OBR's is not.
>> That was a forecast.
>> your notes, I've got my notes, okay.
>> That was a forecast by the OBR.
>> National Bureau of Economic Research.
>> It is that space on the table.
>> And I'm going to ask you I'm I'm I'm
going to ask you both.
>> economy has just gone
>> to ask you both.
Now, let's
leave this aspect of it for a moment
because we can both see that you're
never going to agree on a common set of
numbers and they are all entitled to not
agree on a common set of numbers. Let's
turn to the political impact of the last
10 years.
>> It's been a total triumph.
>> Do you
>> Has not.
>> Both of you
>> We're more respected in the world.
We're
>> you're associated you spent your lives
working for the two parties which have
dominated our politics for the last
century. Do you accept that both of
their political fortunes have suffered
because of Brexit? Alister, do you
accept that for Labour?
>> Uh yes, and I'll tell you why. Because
they haven't fought hard enough to make
sure the public fully understands the
calamity that was inflicted upon us by
these people. And they've tried to
accept
one of I think Kier Starmer's mistakes
was this idea that we're going to make
Brexit work.
You can change things at the margins and
they've tried very hard to do that with
some of the veterinary agreements, with
the Erasmus and so forth. But they have
they don't want to address the
fundamental question.
And you know, am I allowed to ask the
audience a question? For show of hands.
I'd like to know cuz I you know, you can
read polls, you can read all the stats
and all the rest of it. Can I just ask
the people in this room who thinks I'll
be very very neutral success or failure
for the United Kingdom? Who thinks
Brexit has been a success for the United
Kingdom?
Who thinks it's been a failure?
You get that Jacob, but you can live in
your dream world. You get that
everywhere in the country. Everywhere.
>> been here in the year of the referendum
and we'd said who wants to leave and who
wants to stay, we'd have had exactly the
same.
>> I found
that every yard I went from the center
of the city of London, you got more
supporters for Brexit. If we went to
Lincolnshire, if we went to Cornwall,
and I really did find this during the
debates, because I went anywhere that
invited me to speak.
And the closer you were to the center of
the city, the heart of the city, the
more anti-Brexit it was. So, that
doesn't surprise me at all that you get
that.
>> Does it Does it have any impact upon you
that these reasonably intelligent group
of people actually think that what you
inflicted upon the country has damaged
the country?
>> that the British people voted for.
>> Yes, they voted for it based upon
>> And the British people voted for the
result, which you have never wanted to
do.
>> On an honest note, actually, I'm going
to I'm going to bring in some polling by
Ipsos. We're going to talk in detail
about the future a bit later, but as a
sense of where polling stands right now,
over half of British adults would vote
to rejoin the EU if a new referendum was
held. Although that 52%
Alister is probably not as large a
majority as you would hope for if things
have been such a disaster in the last 10
years.
>> I think an awful lot of people just do
not want to revisit the debate.
I do want to revisit the debate, and I
think it's a debate that has to be had.
But I I meet lots of people who
completely buy my analysis of what's
happened, but actually just do not want
to revisit the debate. And I'm afraid
that's where I think the Labour the
government's got itself into
>> not the question in that, is it? It's
like if a vote was held, 52% would apply
would apply to join the Europe would
like to see the UK apply to join the
rejoin the European Union.
>> Yeah, but you you talk
I mean 52% 33 I mean that you if you're
looking at that as an electoral thing,
that's you'd call that a landslide, but
look, I I don't think until there is a
debate, nobody here nobody in this room
thinks that we are going to have a
referendum in the near future. Okay? I
would like there to be one. I don't
actually think we're going to have have
one for some time. And And two reasons.
One is I don't think the political
debate wants to hear but secondly,
while we've got the prospect of people
like Jacob getting into bed with people
like Nigel Farage and Nigel Farage
possibly coming to government, the
European Union is not going to think
about having us back. Because this
debate, this is the triumph that Jacob
can take some comfort in given his views
of the world, that
until the country is settled in the view
that we should be in the European Union,
the European Union is not going to
have us back.
>> Okay. Before you answer, Jacob, I I want
to take you back and put the same
question to you that Alister answered a
moment ago about Labour. So, how
the impact on your party, which
fractured
>> Yes, it's been very
>> extent over Brexit and has been in power
repeatedly since then.
>> It's been very divisive for the
Conservative Party since the early
1990s. That there's been a pro-European
anti-European wing and that has made
room for a form to grow out of the
Conservative Party and led to a lot of
divisions in the last government.
>> failed to actually handle Brexit
properly.
>> um Alister made the point that there was
no plan for leaving. That was a
deliberate policy decision of David
Cameron and it seems to me it was a
deeply responsible one. If you give the
country a referendum and you're the
Prime Minister, you ought to think that
you could lose it.
>> as someone who was arguing for it?
>> what I wanted to do, but I wasn't in
government. I was a backbench MP.
And that was the difficulty. That's the
difficulty with referendums, is that you
don't have the party that wins the
referendum then implementing the policy.
You have the party that is government in
government doing it, who may disagree
with the referendum. And that was the
position we got into, David Cameron
going and Theresa May, who was a
remainer, taking over. And so, yes,
there were lots of ideas of what we
should do when leaving, but we weren't
the government of the day. We were just
arguing for those points.
>> But that that what that that gave them
an extraordinary advantage, that leave
could mean whatever
any of the leavers said that it meant.
And that's why there was such a catalog
of lies, because Johnson said one thing,
Farage said another one, Michael Gove
said another one.
>> back. I mean, listening to him on lies
is like listening to King Herod on child
care.
>> Well, I mean, [snorts] you I think you
should get back get into the modern
world, Jacob. I know it's difficult for
you, but I think that
>> Well, I don't know.
>> I think that [laughter]
I And that's not an anti-historical
point. The The list of of your Peter
Oborne list is so debunked and so
discredited, I can't be bothered. I I've
never sued anybody in my life.
>> haven't sued him.
>> I'm not the right I believe in free
speech.
>> Okay.
>> Now, if I can return to help
If I can return to help Michelle
>> And footnoted.
>> try to put Oh, he's got footnotes in the
book. Marvelous.
>> Yes, referring to things that you said
that turn out not to be true.
>> I'll tell you something about the the
book that I would recommend. You should
get this for your book club, because
this is what Brexit's actually about.
Jacob Rees-Mogg Jacob's uh dad, William
Rees-Mogg, wrote a brilliant book in
1997.
>> Former editor of The Times newspaper.
>> of The Times. It's called The Sovereign
Individual.
It was a guide to the rich and powerful
about how to become more rich and more
powerful. And it was written as a as a
note to investors. And that is what you
interviewed Elon Musk.
That is what a lot of this is about. It
is about the rich getting more rich, the
powerful getting more powerful, and it's
about people being conned by clever
people like Jacob and clever people by
like Nigel Nigel Farage into voting for
something that is fun
>> we weren't the clever ones. We weren't
the clever ones. The only ones who were
clever were the ones who wanted to
rejoin. Um my father believes that if
everybody in the world got richer, the
whole world got richer, that free trade
added to the wealth of the world. It is
indeed. And there's very strong evidence
for that. So, I'm more than happy to
defend my father uh and do it on
>> Anyway, get his book in. Get his book
in. Get his book
>> Okay. Okay. Going going going to come on
to this chart, cuz I think this is
important. You can You can say something
about this chart, yes?
>> It's very Yes Minister-ish, because it
absolutely depends on the question you
ask. So, if you say this, would you like
to rejoin the EU? Yes, you get a
majority. Um marginal
>> from asking that question? I mean,
there's 33% people who said no, we'll
stay out of it. Because
people always hanker for what they
haven't got. But if you ask, would you
like to join the Euro and would you like
your contributions to go up on the
latest budget proposals coming from
Brussels to 36 billion pounds a year,
the answer is very different. When you
say to people, do you want your trade
rules made by a foreign country or
international organizations, the answers
are different. So yes, this is a
headline figure.
But it's not the full picture. If we had
[clears throat] a if we had a debate,
but I agree with Alister, it's unlikely
that we will have the
new referendum. I think this would all
change during the course of the debate.
>> Part of me is is very perplexed that
people like you from the Conservative
Party who essentially their ethos is to
conserve institutions, to believe in
representative government rather than
the will of the people in this kind of
format, that you ever
thought that a referendum was the right
way to make a big decision like this.
There's something almost revolutionary
about it.
>> No, there isn't. Um, Dicey sets out why
he thinks the referendum should be the
preferred way of making constitutional
change after the 1911 Parliament Act.
When you know what will happen.
I think referendum is a is the right way
to make serious constitutional changes
when you have a de facto unicameral
system
>> So how long does the mandate for the
2016 one last?
>> So it's a good question. It's the same
as the Scottish referendum. It's a
generation is what has been said about
Scotland. It's a as the last one was.
The last one was a decision for the best
part of
50 years.
>> I mean, you've got to you've got there's
got to be a clear desire for it. Now, I
think that desire will grow, but at the
same time, unless what I've realized
since kind of being half in half out of
politics,
unless within the political
parliamentary system itself, there is
real pressure for something, it's less
likely to happen. And that's why I have
been disappointed that Labour and the
Lib Dems have basically kind of given
up. They don't They've given up almost
in calling out the damage that's being
done, which is why his side are allowed
to sort of parrot the nonsense that they
do.
>> with the second half of that, but I
don't disagree with the first half. I
think there isn't an appetite
to to revisit this, but I'm also not
sure the EU will exist in 20 years time.
It's got major financial problems. It's
trying to increase its budget. It's got
strains within it economically, and it's
got strains within it culturally in
relation to mass migration.
>> Would you accept this on a stumble that
that the the immigration was a big part
of the debate in 2016, and since then
you can see that in so many other
European countries?
So,
I mean, those tensions have
They They've been shown not to be
unique. They weren't whipped up. They
exist in other places because of the
world that we're in.
>> which is why his side are allowed to
sort of parrot the nonsense that they
do. I disagree with the second So, I
where I say
>> prime minister that Jacob
>> So, what I accept and this government
actually has managed to get it down to
sort of more acceptable level.
Over time, that could become damaging to
our economy as we get older and older
and older and we we try to find the
workers that we're going to going to
need to look after us and so forth. But,
I think that the Look, the rest This is
why I say the rest of Europe is facing a
lot of the same challenges.
Part of the problem with the Brexit
debate has always been this sense of our
sort of great British exceptionalism.
Well, we do these amazing big things
like we're leaving the European Union.
You watch, the French will follow and
the Dutch will follow and the None of
them have followed.
>> Well, did you think I ever said that?
>> They have They have a major part of our
debate. They have looked at us,
including even the far right like Le
Pen. They have looked at the damage
we've done to ourselves and said, "No,
this is not the way to go." What I think
is going to happen is what I don't talk
about rejoin. I talk about join, cuz I
think Europe has to change as well. And
I I I
>> Tony Blair, your old boss, says that is
not really an argument we're having
right now because the UK wouldn't do it
from a position of strength and to a
negotiation.
>> Because we've given up so much of the
advantage. We did have the rebate. We
weren't in Schengen. We weren't in the
Euro. We've given up all that. We've
given away so much.
>> So so are you accepting that if we
joined we'd have to take all that?
>> I'm accepting that it would be a very
very difficult negotiation which you've
made a lot harder because you lost the
election.
>> Euro,
>> I don't know because I think it's going
to be a very different Europe. I want to
see that. I want to see a Europe that
has Ukraine in it. I want to see Europe
that even has Turkey in it because of
their military strength which we're
going to need particularly as the
Americans seem to be sort of, you know,
deserting us on that front. I want to
see Norway. Iceland's having a
referendum coming up about whether to
revisit. I think we've got to think of
Europe not as, you know, and I would get
rid of the whole kind of, you know, the
the the the power of the veto. We've got
to have a very different Europe. And but
I think that the only, in fact, I I I I
made a note this morning cuz I've become
a bit of a fan of the Pope since his
encyclical on AI. Uh I still don't do
God, but he said yes.
>> You'll have to have that in common then,
Jacob being a Catholic.
>> I think it's wonderful on AI.
>> It's wonderful. Did you agree with
>> important. I agreed with I agreed with
the bits about how mankind needs to keep
control of AI. Then you have to
understand the human person is
fundamental.
>> as well with his with his with his fears
about growing inequality. But yesterday
in the Spanish parliament he said, "I
encourage you all to nurture the process
of the European Union which is not
merely a counterweight to other powers,
but a gift to humanity." Did you agree
with that?
>> It's not an infallible statement. I
don't have to agree with
The the the the Holy Father is only
infallible when he speaks on a matter of
faith and morals ex cathedra. That was
not faith or morals. It was not ex
cathedra. And I could point to past the
ninth saying that actually the European
Union is the apostate state and is
eternally damned. But that would be
That's a little bit spicy.
>> Yes, it would. It would. Yeah. Anyway,
my point The point
>> on.
I want again on the on the politics. Do
you
Do you think that Brexit has led us to
the much more multi-party politics that
we are in now? And Jacob, do you regret
that? Your party not only regarded
itself as a natural party of government,
but actually historically has more than
often been that.
>> I think the parties managed to come too
close together. That you had David
Cameron wanting to be the heir to Blair,
and people feeling that it didn't matter
how they voted.
>> wasn't a real conservative.
>> Nothing changed. No, I'm not saying
that. I'm just saying he accepted a lot
of the changes under Labour '97 to 2010.
>> Quite right.
>> And that
And Labour had accepted a lot of the
changes Margaret Thatcher made,
which I may think is quite right. So, we
have a degree of common ground, but I
think one of the reasons for Brexit is
that people felt whoever they voted for
nothing changed, and that therefore they
needed to vote for fundamental change.
They found that very little has changed
in the 10 years since. We are still
massively over-regulated. We still have
too big a state.
>> Yeah, but the country has changed so
much. I want to ask you one thing about
regulation though. It was You were in
the government, Boris Johnson's
government, that the moment that the UK
actually left the EU at the end of 2020.
And at that moment, all those EU
regulations that you were so angry about
for ages, they were put into UK law.
>> That's right, and I had a bill that I
introduced to the house that would have
got rid of
>> just like fixed them all.
>> We're going back to your Today program
days. Um
>> Ooh.
>> I I
>> Tell you that, Michelle.
>> I had a bill that I introduced to
Parliament that was going to get rid of
6,000 EU regulations. And I'm sorry to
say that Rishi Sunak, when he came in,
binned it, which was a great mistake.
>> Okay. Um
the future. We've touched on this a bit
already.
>> Yes, the parties. Okay.
>> I mean, I I think this kind of
atomization, I'm not sure it's directly
related to Brexit, but I think Brexit
played a part in it.
Because I actually think people who
voted A lot of people who voted for
Brexit are disappointed that that hasn't
delivered a better life for them.
Um beyond the symbolism and the flags
and the sort of fake debate about
sovereignty and so forth.
So, I think that what's happened is that
they've done Well, we did Labour, we did
the Tories, and then we did this big
thing.
And for millions and millions of people
in this country, their lives are still
pretty crap.
And so, they're they're looking around.
And also, I think that tribalism
has broken down.
Uh, now you can argue that's a good
thing or a bad thing, but people just I
think we now have a a generation below
my generation, in fact, even below my
kids' generation that is that is
thinking, I don't have I don't I can
shop around. We you know, just as they
shop around on television, just as they
shop around for dates, you know, you can
do you can just shop around. And they're
they're they're thinking in politics,
I'm going to go And so, I think we've
got the the And And the other thing
that's happened is very interesting to
me. Nigel Farage used to be a big fan of
proportional representation.
Now, in this atomized politics, he's
working out that I could I could get
there with 25 28
>> uh, Jacob, that he could be the next
Prime Minister, Nigel Farage?
>> It's not impossible on the polling that
he's achieving. I mean, I think John
Curtice has said that that's not
impossible, who I greatly respect.
>> you Would you join him? Have you
considered joining Reform?
>> Um, I'm not going to join Reform, but I
hope that the Conservatives and Reform
will, um, work together.
>> A- As in a formal pact? Is that what
you're hoping?
>> us to have a pre-election pact, um, a
coupon election, and to and to work
together. I I I think it could be very
successful. I think that Reform would
bring something, uh, to the Conservative
Party, the charisma of, um,
Nigel Farage, but that the Conservatives
have depth and policy-making strength
that Reform lacks. And Reform remains
basically a one-man band.
>> And would you therefore be looking to
him to do what? To rip up the current
An- Any agreements? Any If the current
agreements with the EU and start again?
That's what That's pretty much what he
told me when he came on the podcast.
>> I I really agree with that. That I think
that uh, leave means leave. We are out.
We should not be making new agreements.
The new Erasmus scheme is bonkersly
expensive. It's five times the price
of the Turing scheme. It's really crazy
to waste money in that way when we're
short of money for defense.
>> Alister, the Bloomberg economics when
they model different scenarios for the
future, single joining the single market
for goods, joining the customs union and
having a series of Swiss style
arrangements,
none of them deliver
a comparable boost to the economy
compared to the assessment on how much
has been lost to GDP. When you look at
Keir Starmer and his two likely
challenges, Wes Streeting and Andy
Burnham, they've all these senior labor
figures have got a slightly different
position on the EU. How much does that
disappoint you?
>> They've got a slightly different
position.
>> Slightly different position on how they
feel about rejoining, when they rejoin,
whether they whether they want to have
the debate now or not, whether they
>> we're in a very very strange place
because of course
uh
Keir Starmer was the prime minister, Wes
Streeting is able to be much much more
open. And as I I didn't realize that Wes
wanted us sort of back in ASAP, but he's
obviously decided that's his position.
Um
It all disappoints me, to be absolutely
frank, cuz the thing that does
disappoints me most of all
I genuinely worry if this Labour
government is not a success, I think our
politics is going to a very dark place.
Uh you mentioned Europe, and one of the
trends around Europe is that they you
know, the populist radical right is is
kind of on the march. Now, Jacob may
think that's a good thing, I think it's
a terribly dangerous thing. I think that
what we've seen in just in the last few
days, and and exacerbated, sorry to
mention your first interview here again,
exacerbated by the influence that Elon
Musk has on our sort of social media
landscape, I think what we've seen in in
Belfast and in Southampton recently,
that is to me the politics of reform and
restore.
Uh
and and and and one of the problems we
have in the way that we talk about and
deal with these people,
we treat them as kind of, you know,
normal mainstream politicians. I don't
believe that they are. I think they're
extremists. I think they're dangerous. I
think Brexit was a vehicle for them.
>> I don't agree with that. I actually
think we're very fortunate in this
country that we don't have that type of
extremist that has been rising on the
continent. I think that Nigel Farage is
within the normal bounds of British
political life. I think our politics is
actually pretty stable. Our electoral
system works. Our democracy works. It
changed government when it thought a
government had failed. That is a proper
process. And so I'm I'm more confident
about the stability of our political
system.
>> Right, one last question to close. It's
2036 and we are all gathered again to
mark 20 years since Brexit. What do you
think the relationship with the EU will
be then? Jacob?
>> I think it will be a friendly
third-party relationship. I think the EU
will no longer be hankering for us to
return if it still exists, and that we
will be thriving outside the clasp, the
dead hand of EU regulation. We'll have
made trade deals globally. We've got the
CTPPP. We've got so many opportunities
globally. So, I'm very excited about it.
>> Alister?
>> the trade deals that were promised, they
were a big part of the lies.
And they're not that happening. The the
>> which we'd have to give up if we left
the EU.
>> in 2036.
>> truth is I don't know. Uh,
>> What do you hope for?
>> What I hope for is what I described
earlier. Europe where you
>> Having rejoined or some other kind of
relationship?
>> Having joined a totally different
organization in which it's possible, for
example, to have different levels of
membership, in which it's possible for
the Western Balkans to be in on one
basis, for Ukraine to be on the other,
for the Turks to be part of very much of
a defense alliance, but as Europe part
of European defense, for the Norwegians
>> But no one in the commission is talking
about this.
>> Some of them are.
>> It's not happening.
>> The logical people are.
>> David Cameron couldn't get anything out
of his renegotiation, which he announced
>> But I think Alister is imagining a very
different a very different kind of EU.
>> She's asking 20 years. You have to look
ahead Jacob. I told you about it 2036
not 2020.
>> So 20 years from the
>> Anyway, we are still
with yeah, so from the here and now
we're also looking into the future. I'm
going to take a deep breath and I'm very
thankfully leave the stage now and thank
you both very much indeed.
>> This is the only reason we're here.
This is the only reason we're here.
>> [applause]
>> Thank you.
>> [music]
>> And that is where we left it. I really
did need to breathe deeply after we left
the stage, but Jacob and Alister were
fine with each other afterwards and were
busy taking pictures for their socials
before they left Bloomberg. Finally, if
you're new to the show and you liked
what you saw here, do search for more
episodes because you'll find that we go
in-depth every single time whether it's
Gary Lineker on football and media,
David Dimbleby on UK politics, Anthony
Scaramucci on US politics, and coming up
we have Steve Hilton who is running to
be the Republican governor of
California.
>> [music]